# Art & Design Module 2: 

Core questions:
1. Quantified Self: Public health savior or one-way ticket to neuroticism? What do you think?
2. What safeguards can we put in place to be mindful of personal data?

**From MIT Technology Review: ["The Measured Life"](http://www.technologyreview.com/featuredstory/424390/the-measured-life/)**
>PatientsLikeMe, a social-networking site that provides users with tools to track their health status and communicate with other patients, has gathered a wealth of data on its 105,000 members. (The site makes money by anonymizing the data and selling it to pharmaceutical companies and other customers.) In 2008, after a small Italian study published in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences suggested that lithium could delay the progression of ALS, or Lou Gehrig’s disease, a small group of the ALS patients on PatientsLikeMe began taking the drug, and the company rolled out a number of tools to help them track their symptoms, their respiratory capacity, their dosage and blood levels of lithium, and any side effects they observed. Because the patients had collected so much data on themselves before starting the drug, researchers could analyze how their symptoms changed in the 12 months before they began taking it as well studying any changes that came after—something that’s not possible in the typical clinical trial. The company published a study based on its data in April. The drug, unfortunately, was found to have no effect.

>The growing availability of new monitoring devices and the increasing sophistication of social networks promise to make self-tracking much more powerful than it was when patients who wanted to monitor their own conditions were limited to standard spreadsheets and daily logs. “We see the potential to change the power dynamics in health care,” says the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation’s Tarini. People could take far more responsibility for monitoring their own health. The concept of personalized medicine could change as well; rather than relying on pharmaceutical companies that have little incentive to individualize treatments, patients could simply try different interventions and record how their physiological signs and symptoms change in response.

**From Slate: ["The Year We Quantified Everything and Learned … Anything?"](http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2013/12/27/quantified_self_critique_personal_data_apps_for_calories_exercise_sleep.html)**
>“Know thyself,” reads the 2,500-year-old inscription above the entrance to the Oracle at Delphi. “Self knowledge through numbers,” insist today’s life loggers. Here are some more numbers: 100 million Americans are currently on a diet. The weight-loss industry pulls in more than $20 billion a year. You can’t blame app developers for wanting a piece of that action, but it’s worth remembering that the people behind Fitbit, Jawbone, and the rest are on their own missions to quantify, optimize, and control. Regardless of how well they work as life hacks, tracking behavior and assigning numerical values to things are great business strategies. (That’s one reason debate has swirled around whether quantified self data is secure.) It makes economic sense for companies to promote the collection and storage of lots of personal information. And no, understanding that shouldn’t necessarily dissuade us from downloading the app that will help us drop five pounds. But as long as we’re turning our lives into a stream of data points, we might as well consider that there’s always a bigger spreadsheet.